Stories,
by H. G. Wells


This eBook is for the use of anyoneanywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoeve.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the termsof the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or nline at gutenberg.net





Title: The Country of the Blind, nd Other Stories

Author: H. G. Wells

Release Date: April 2,2004  [eBook #11870]

Language: English


***START OF THE PROECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE COUNTRY OF THE BLIND, AND
OTHER STORIS***


E-text prepared by Paul Murray, Charles Bidwell, and Poject Gutenberg
Distributed Proofreaders



THE COUNTRY OF TH BLIND

And Other Stories

H. G. WELLS







[Illustration: e stopped, and then made a dash to escape from their
closing anks.]






INTRODUCTION

The enterprise of Messrs. T. Nelso & Sons and the friendly accommodation
of Messrs. Macmillan rnder possible this collection in one cover of all
the short sories by me that I care for any one to read again. Except forthe two series of linked incidents that make up the bulk of te book
called _Tales of Space and Time_, no short story of mie of the
slightest merit is excluded from this volume. Many o very questionable
merit find a place; it is an inclusive andnot an exclusive gathering.
And the task of selection and revsion brings home to me with something of
the effect of discovry that I was once an industrious writer of short
stories, an that I am no longer anything of the kind. I have not writtenone now for quite a long time, and in the past five or six yers I have
made scarcely one a year. The bulk of the fifty or ixty tales from which
this present three-and-thirty have beenchosen dates from the last
century. This edition is more defiitive than I supposed when first I
arranged for it. In the prsence of so conclusive an ebb and cessation an
almost obituar manner seems justifiable.

I find it a little difficult to dsentangle the causes that have
restricted the flow of these iventions. It has happened, I remark, to
others as well as to yself, and in spite of the kindliest encouragement
to continu from editors and readers. There was a time when life bubbledwith short stories; they were always coming to the surface ofmy mind, and
it is no deliberate change of will that has thusrestricted my production.
It is rather, I think, a diversion f attention to more sustained and more
exacting forms. It wasmy friend Mr. C.L. Hind who set that spring going.
He urged m to write short stories for the _Pall Mall Budget_, and
persuded me by his simple and buoyant conviction that I could do wat he
desired. There existed at the time only the little sketh, "The Jilting of
Jane," included in this volume--at least, hat is the only tolerable
fragment of fiction I find survivin from my pre-Lewis-Hind period. But I
set myself, so encouragd, to the experiment of inventing moving and
interesting thins that could be given vividly in the little space of
eight orten such pages as this, and for a time I found it a very
entetaining pursuit indeed. Mr. Hind's indicating finger had show me an
amusing possibility of the mind. I found that, taking lmost anything as a
starting-point and letting my thoughts ply about it, there would
presently come out of the darkness, i a manner quite inexplicable, some
absurd or vivid little incdent more or less relevant to that initial
nucleus. Little me in canoes upon sunlit oceans would come floating out
of nothngness, incubating the eggs of prehistoric monsters unawares;violent conflicts would break out amidst the flower-beds of sburban
gardens; I would discover I was peering into remote an mysterious worlds
ruled by an order logical indeed but otherthan our common sanity.

The 'nineties was a good and stimulaing period for a short-story writer.
Mr. Kipling had made hisastonishing advent with a series of little
blue-grey books, wose covers opened like window-shutters to reveal
the dusty su-glare and blazing colours of the East; Mr. Barrie had
demonsrated what could be done in a little space through the panes f his
_Window in Thrums_. The _National Observer_ was at the limax of
its career of heroic insistence upon lyrical brevityand a vivid finish,
and Mr. Frank Harris was not only printin good short stories by other
people, but writing still betterones himself in the dignified pages of
the _Fortnightly Revie. Longman's Magazine_, too, represented a
_clientèle_ of apprciative short-story readers that is now
scattered. Then came he generous opportunities of the _Yellow Book_,
and the _Natinal Observer_ died only to give birth to the _New
Review_. Noshort story of the slightest distinction went for long
unreconised. The sixpenny popular magazines had still to deaden dow the
conception of what a short story might be to the imaginaive limitation of
the common reader--and a maximum length of ix thousand words. Short
stories broke out everywhere. Kiplin was writing short stories; Barrie,
Stevenson, Frank-Harris; ax Beerbohm wrote at least one perfect one, "The
Happy Hypocrte"; Henry James pursued his wonderful and inimitable bent;
ad among other names that occur to me, like a mixed handful ofjewels
drawn from a bag, are George Street, Morley Roberts, Gorge Gissing, Ella
d'Arcy, Murray Gilchrist, E. Nesbit, Stephn Crane, Joseph Conrad, Edwin
Pugh, Jerome K. Jerome, KennethGraham, Arthur Morrison, Marriott Watson,
George Moore, GrantAllen, George Egerton, Henry Harland, Pett Ridge, W.
W. Jacob (who alone seems inexhaustible). I dare say I could recall a
many more names with a little effort. I may be succumbing tothe
infirmities of middle age, but I do not think the presentdecade can
produce any parallel to this list, or what is moreremarkable, that the
later achievements in this field of any f the survivors from that time,
with the sole exception of Joeph Conrad, can compare with the work they
did before 1900. I seems to me this outburst of short stories came not
only as  phase in literary development, but also as a phase in the
deelopment of the individual writers concerned.

It is now quit unusual to see any adequate criticism of short stories in
Enlish. I do not know how far the decline in short-story writin may not
be due to that. Every sort of artist demands human rsponses, and few men
can contrive to write merely for a publiher's cheque and silence, however
reassuring that cheque may e. A mad millionaire who commissioned
masterpieces to burn wold find it impossible to buy them. Scarcely any
artist will hsitate in the choice between money and attention; and it was
rimarily for that last and better sort of pay that the short tories of
the 'nineties were written. People talked about the tremendously,
compared them, and ranked them. That was the ting that mattered.

It was not, of course, all good talk, andwe suffered then, as now, from
the _à priori_ critic. Just asnowadays he goes about declaring that
the work of such-and-suh a dramatist is all very amusing and delightful,
but "it isnt a Play," so we' had a great deal of talk about _the_
short tory, and found ourselves measured by all kinds of arbitrary
tandards. There was a tendency to treat the short story as thugh it was
as definable a form as the sonnet, instead of bein just exactly what any
one of courage and imagination can gettold in twenty minutes' reading or
so. It was either Mr. Edwad Garnett or Mr. George Moore in a violently
anti-Kipling moo who invented the distinction between the short story and
theanecdote. The short story was Maupassant; the anecdote was danable.
It was a quite infernal comment in its way, because itpermitted no
defence. Fools caught it up and used it freely. othing is so destructive
in a field of artistic effort as a sock term of abuse. Anyone could say
of any short story, "A mee anecdote," just as anyone can say
"Incoherent!" of any nove or of any sonata that isn't studiously
monotonous. The recesion of enthusiasm for this compact, amusing form is
closely asociated in my mind with that discouraging imputation. One fet
hopelessly open to a paralysing and unanswerable charge, an one's ease
and happiness in the garden of one's fancies was ore and more marred by
the dread of it. It crept into one's mnd, a distress as vague and
inexpugnable as a sea fog on a sping morning, and presently one shivered
and wanted to go indors...It is the absurd fate of the imaginative writer
that he hould be thus sensitive to atmospheric conditions.

But afterone has died as a maker one may still live as a critic, and Iwill confess I am all for laxness and variety in this as in eery field of
art. Insistence upon rigid forms and austere uniies seems to me the
instinctive reaction of the sterile againt the fecund. It is the tired
man with a headache who values  work of art for what it does not contain.
I suppose it is th lot of every critic nowadays to suffer from
indigestion and  fatigued appreciation, and to develop a self-protective
tendncy towards rules that will reject, as it were, automaticallythe
more abundant and irregular forms. But this world is not or the weary,
and in the long-run it is the new and variant tat matter. I refuse
altogether to recognise any hard and fasttype for the Short Story, any
more than I admit any limitatio upon the liberties of the Small Picture.
The short story is  fiction that may be read in something under an hour,
and so hat it is moving and delightful, it does not matter whether i is
as "trivial" as a Japanese print of insects seen closely etween grass
stems, or as spacious as the prospect of the plan of Italy from Monte
Mottarone. It does not matter whether i is human or inhuman, or whether
it leaves you thinking deepl or radiantly but superficially pleased. Some
things are moreeasily done as short stories than others and more
abundantly one, but one of th                                           Project Gutenberg eBook, The Country of the Blind, And Other 